---
title: Let 'localhost' be localhost.
abbrev: let-localhost-be-localhost
docname: draft-ietf-dnsop-let-localhost-be-localhost-01
date: 2017
category: std
updates: 6761

ipr: trust200902
area: General
workgroup: DNSOP
keyword: Internet-Draft

pi: [toc, tocindent, sortrefs, symrefs, strict, compact, comments, inline]

author:
-
  ins: M. West
  name: Mike West
  organization: Google, Inc
  email: mkwst@google.com
  uri: https://mikewest.org/

normative:
  RFC2119:
  RFC6761:
  RFC6890:

informative:
  RFC1537:
  RFC2606:
  RFC3397:
  I-D.ietf-sunset4-gapanalysis:
  SECURE-CONTEXTS:
    target: http://w3c.github.io/webappsec-secure-contexts/
    title: "Secure Contexts"
    author:
    -
      ins: M. West
      name: Mike West
      organization: Google, Inc

--- abstract

This document updates RFC6761 with the goal of ensuring that `localhost` can be
safely relied upon as a name for the local host's loopback interface. To that
end, stub resolvers are required to resolve localhost names to loopback
addresses. Recursive DNS servers are required to return `NXDOMAIN` when queried
for localhost names, making non-conformant stub resolvers more likely to fail
and produce problem reports that result in updates.

Together, these requirements would allow applications and specifications to
join regular users in drawing the common-sense conclusions that `localhost`
means `localhost`, and doesn't resolve to somewhere else on the network.

--- middle

# Introduction

The `127.0.0.0/8` IPv4 address block and `::1/128` IPv6 address block are
reserved as loopback addresses. Traffic to this block is assured to remain
within a single host, and can not legitimately appear on any network
anywhere. This turns out to be a very useful property in a number of
circumstances; useful enough to label explicitly and interoperably as
`localhost`. {{RFC1537}} suggests that this special-use top-level domain name
has been implicitly mapped to loopback addresses for decades at this point, and
that {{RFC6761}}'s assertion that developers may "assume that IPv4 and IPv6
address queries for localhost names will always resolve to the respective
IP loopback address" is well-founded.

Unfortunately, the rest of that latter document's requirements undercut the
assumption it suggests. Client software is empowered to send localhost names to
DNS servers, and resolvers are empowered to return unexpectedly non-loopback
results. This divide between theory and practice has a few impacts:

First, the lack of confidence that `localhost` actually resolves to the loopback
interface encourages application developers to hard-code IP addresses like
`127.0.0.1` in order to obtain certainty regarding routing. This causes problems
in the transition from IPv4 to IPv6 (see problem 8 in
{{I-D.ietf-sunset4-gapanalysis}}).

Second, HTTP user agents sometimes distinguish certain contexts as
"secure"-enough to make certain features available. Given the certainty that
`127.0.0.1` cannot be maliciously manipulated or monitored, {{SECURE-CONTEXTS}}
treats it as such a context. Since `localhost` might not actually map to the
loopback address, that document declines to give it the same treatment. This
exclusion has (rightly) surprised some developers, and exacerbates the risks
of hard-coded IP addresses by giving developers positive encouragement to use
an explicit loopback address rather than a localhost name.

This document updates {{RFC6761}}'s recommendations regarding `localhost` by
requiring that name resolution APIs and libraries themselves return a loopback
address when queried for localhost names, bypassing lookup via recursive and
authoritative DNS servers entirely.

In addition, recursive and authoritative DNS servers are required to return
`NXDOMAIN` for such queries. This increases the likelihood that non-conformant
stub resolvers will not go undetected. Note that this does not have the result
that such resolvers will fail safeâ€”it just makes it more likely that they will
be detected and fixed, since they will fail in the presence of conforming name
servers.

These changes are not sufficient to ensure that `localhost` can be assumed to
actually refer to an address on the local machine. This document therefore
further requires that applications that wish to make that assumption handle the
name `localhost` specially.


# Terminology and notation

The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", "SHOULD",
"SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this document are to be
interpreted as described in {{RFC2119}}.

IPv4 loopback addresses are registered in Table 4 of Section 2.2.2 of
{{RFC6890}} as `127.0.0.0/8`.

IPv6 loopback addresses are registered in Table 17 of Section 2.2.3 of
{{RFC6890}} as `::1/128`.

The domain `localhost.`, and any names falling within `.localhost.`, are known
as "localhost names".


# The "localhost." Special-Use Domain Name {#localhost-names}

Localhost names are special insofar as these names do not exist in the DNS, and
querying the DNS for them is an error. With that principle in mind, the
considerations outlined in {{RFC6761}} can be answered as follows:

1.  Users are free to use localhost names as they would any other domain names.
    Users may assume that IPv4 and IPv6 address queries for localhost names will
    always resolve to the respective IP loopback address.

2.  Application software MAY recognize localhost names as special, or MAY pass
    them to name resolution APIs as they would for other domain names.

    If application software wishes to make security decisions based upon the
    assumption that localhost names resolve to loopback addresses (e.g. if it
    wishes to ensure that a context meets the requirements laid out in
    {{SECURE-CONTEXTS}}), then it MUST directly translate localhost names to a
    loopback address, and MUST NOT rely upon name resolution APIs to do so.

    Application software MUST NOT use a searchlist to resolve a localhost name.
    That is, even if DHCP's domain search option {{RFC3397}} is used to specify
    a searchlist of `example.com` for a given network, the name `localhost` will
    not be resolved as `localhost.example.com.` but as `localhost.`, and
    `subdomain.localhost` will not be resolved as
    `subdomain.localhost.example.com.` but as `subdomain.localhost.`.

3.  Name resolution APIs and libraries MUST recognize localhost names as
    special, and MUST always return an appropriate IP loopback address for
    IPv4 and IPv6 address queries and negative responses for all other query
    types. Name resolution APIs MUST NOT send queries for localhost names to
    their configured recursive DNS server(s).
    
    As for application software, name resolution APIs and libraries MUST NOT use
    a searchlist to resolve a localhost name.

4.  (Caching) recursive DNS servers MUST respond to queries for localhost names
    with NXDOMAIN.

5.  Authoritative DNS servers MUST respond to queries for localhost names with
    NXDOMAIN.

6.  DNS server operators SHOULD be aware that the effective RDATA for localhost
    names is defined by protocol specification and cannot be modified by local
    configuration.

7.  DNS Registries/Registrars MUST NOT grant requests to register localhost
    names in the normal way to any person or entity. Localhost names are
    defined by protocol specification and fall outside the set of names
    available for allocation by registries/registrars. Attempting to allocate a
    localhost name as if it were a normal DNS domain name will not work as
    desired, for reasons 2, 3, 4, and 5 above.


# IANA Considerations

IANA is requested to update the `localhost.` registration in the registry of
Special-Use Domain Names {{RFC6761}} to reference the domain name reservations
considerations section of this document.

## Domain Name Reservation Considerations

This document requests that IANA update the `localhost.` registration in the
registry of Special-Use Domain Names {{RFC6761}} to reference the domain name
reservation considerations defined in {{localhost-names}}.

## DNSSEC

The `.localhost` TLD is already assigned to IANA, as per {{RFC2606}}, but does
not have an entry in the DNSSEC root-zone. This means that the root will return
an NXDOMAIN response along with NSEC records constituting a secure denial of
existence if queried. That's consistent with the general principle that
localhost names do not exist in the DNS, and the subsequent requirements to
return NXDOMAIN that are laid out in {{localhost-names}}.

# Security Considerations

## Applications are encouraged to resolve localhost names themselves.

Applications that attempt to use the local resolver to query `localhost` do not
fail safely. If an attacker sets up a malicious DNS server which returns a
non-loopback address when queried for localhost names, such applications will
connect to that remote server assuming it is local. This risk drives the
requirement that applications resolve localhost names themselves if they intend
to make security decisions based on the assumption that localhost names resolve
locally.

There may be cases in which the target runtime environment can be safely assumed
to do the right thing with localhost names. In this case, the requirement that
the application resolve localhost names on its own may be safe to ignore, but
only if all the requirements under point 2 of {{localhost-names}} are known to
be followed by the resolver that is known to be present in the target
environment.

## Non-TLD 'localhost' labels

Hosts like `localhost.example.com` contain a `localhost` label, but are not
affected one way or another by the recommendations in this document. They are
not "localhost names", have no resolution guarantees, and should not be given
special treatment, either in DNS or in client software.

# Implementation Considerations

## Non-DNS usage of localhost names

Some application software differentiates between the hostname `localhost` and
the IP address `127.0.0.1`. MySQL, for example, uses a unix domain socket for
the former, and a TCP connection to the loopback address for the latter. The
constraints on name resolution APIs above do not preclude this kind of
differentiation.

--- back

# Changes from RFC 6761

{{localhost-names}} updates the requirements in section 6.3 of {{RFC6761}} in a
few substantive ways:

1.  Application software and name resolution APIs and libraries are prohibited
    from using searchlists when resolving localhost names, and encouraged to
    bypass resolution APIs and libraries altogether if they intend to make
    security decisions based on the `localhost` name.

2.  Name resolution APIs and libraries are required to resolve localhost names
    to loopback addresses, without sending the query on to caching DNS servers.

3.  Caching and authoritative DNS servers are required to respond to resolution
    requests for localhost names with NXDOMAIN.


# Changes in this draft

## draft-ietf-dnsop-let-localhost-be-localhost-01

*   Explicit adoption of the principle Wes Hardaker proposed in
    <https://www.ietf.org/mail-archive/web/dnsop/current/msg21039.html>, and
    that Warren Kumari reiterated in
    <https://www.ietf.org/mail-archive/web/dnsop/current/msg21129.html>:
    localhost names do not exist in the DNS, there is no authoritative source
    for these names, and querying resolvers for them is an error.

*   Slight tightening of the admonition against search lists.

*   Addressed `localhost` labels in non-localhost names.

## draft-ietf-dnsop-let-localhost-be-localhost-01

*   No change since draft-west-let-localhost-be-localhost-06, just renaming the
    document after DNSOP adopted it.

## draft-west-let-localhost-be-localhost-06

*   Incorporated Ted Lemon's further feedback from
    <https://www.ietf.org/mail-archive/web/dnsop/current/msg20769.html>

*   Explicitly waffling on DNSSEC.

## draft-west-let-localhost-be-localhost-05

*   Updated obsolete references to RFC 5735 and 5156 in favor of {{RFC6890}}.

*   Clarify that non-caching recursive DNS servers are also addressed by #4 in
    Section 3.

*   Reformulating the abstract and introduction based on feedback like Ted
    Lemon's in <https://www.ietf.org/mail-archive/web/dnsop/current/msg20757.html>

*   Added a request that an insecure delegation for `localhost.` be added to the
    root-zone.

## draft-west-let-localhost-be-localhost-04

*   Restructured the draft as a stand-alone document, rather than as set of
    monkey-patches against {{RFC6761}}.

## draft-west-let-localhost-be-localhost-03

*   Explicitly referenced {{I-D.ietf-sunset4-gapanalysis}}.

*   Added a prohibition against using searchlists to resolve localhost names.

*   Noted that MySQL has special behavior differentiating the connection
    mechanism used for `localhost` and `127.0.0.1`.

## draft-west-let-localhost-be-localhost-02

*   Pulled in definitions for IPv4 and IPv6 loopback addresses.

## draft-west-let-localhost-be-localhost-01

*   Added a requirement that caching DNS servers MUST generate an immediate
    negative response.

## draft-west-let-localhost-be-localhost-00

First draft.


# Acknowledgements

Ryan Sleevi and Emily Stark informed me about the strange state of localhost
name resolution. Erik Nygren poked me to take another look at the set of
decisions we made in {{SECURE-CONTEXTS}} around `localhost.`; this document is
the result. They, along with Warren Kumari, Ted Lemon, John Levine, Mark
Andrews, and many other members of DNSOP offered substantive feedback that
markedly improved the quality of this document.
